[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory we are back here on the
set for the first time in a long time
and nobody better to be doing it with
than a man jay shetty jay welcome to the
show man hey tom thanks for having me
back i was saying to you i'm like i was
so excited to sit in the seat again
that that i couldn't do it any other way
i i am happy to have you back in that
seat we got tested we are here we are
ready to rock absolutely and i am really
excited to talk about the book think
like a monk the highest praise that i
can ever pay to something is that it's
real
in terms of if you use it it will make
your life better
if people are here for a self-help book
on how to find joy to figure out what
their passion is to reduce stress
anxiety they're in the right place the
book is really really extraordinary
i want to know how close to
encapsulating the notion of thinking
like a monk can you get like how like if
you were to give somebody just a
nutshell notion
of what that means what would you say
i'd say it means to live a life
in alignment
and what that means
is that you live a life where what you
think what you say and what you do
are aligned with your truer self and
what i mean by your truest self
is the self that was not given to you by
your parents
or by your education or by media or
movies or not the self that you've
created to function in the world so i
think if you strip away
all of those expectations obligations
and opinions
what you're left with
if you live in alignment with that then
you're thinking like a monk all right so
that is the very thing i want to get to
so dharma
which is a word that i knew only from
jack kerouac in the whole title of
dharma bums which i have not read but
that notion was always very interesting
to me so one of the questions i get
asked a lot probably the thing i get
asked more than anything is how to find
your passion
and
to me hearing you talk about dharma and
identifying your essence
it really aligns with that idea um can
you explain like what is the definition
of dharma is it different than finding
your passion is it like what is one's
true essence when those things are
stripped away like how do you begin to
to approach that as a person or a monk
quite frankly so yeah the word dharma
means a lot of things and it's always
hard to translate ancient sanskrit words
into modern day english but the closest
two definitions are your true nature
and your eternal purpose so it's almost
like this is something that's already
existing it's already almost part of
your dna and part of your makeup
and it's allowing that to be completely
unleashed but i break it down in the
book to make it really simple because
just like you the amount of people that
say to me
jay what's my passion
what's my purpose so i use dharma to be
described as the word purpose
and then i create this formula
or this mathematical equation for how to
unlock purpose and to make it simple and
obviously people can dive into the book
and do the questions and everything else
that's in there it's passion
plus strength
plus compassion
equals purpose
and i'm going to say that again because
i love to break it down because i'm
going to break each of these down for
you as well that passion
plus strengths plus compassion equals
purpose or dharma and this is also
similar with the concept of ikigai in
the japanese terminology which is reason
for being so you find these in a lot of
ancient traditions
but now let's focus on the word passion
how do you know what your passion is
so
to break it down i've been thinking that
purpose is like an adult
passion is like a teenager
interest is like a
child and curiosity is the womb
so the birthplace of passion
is actually curiosity and interest
and i think we waste so much time trying
to be like what am i really passionate
about what do i really believe in
that's going to take years to figure out
and i've heard you say this too that's
going to take experimenting it's going
to take testing
but the thing you can start with right
now is the simplest form of
what am i curious about what am i
interested in
let me take a course on that or let me
take a seminar on that or let me go and
try that or let me shadow someone who's
done that
and that experimenting process is the
only way to unlock your passion
so to me that's step one
the other way of approaching your
passion
is through compassion
so actually a lot of people find their
passion through pain they find it
through pain that they went through
pain of someone that they loved and lost
pain of someone who went through a
physical ailment in their life or
something that they went through and
then that becomes their passion that
they've seen the worst horrific type of
pain and they never want to see it again
and that becomes what
illuminates their passion to them
and so compassion is another way
and actually sometimes a simpler way
because we all know what pain we don't
want to feel again and we all know what
pain we don't want someone else to feel
again why do you think so many people
struggle with this and why do they
struggle so much to find the answer for
themselves
to answer in that order
i think we care so much because deep
inside of us we know
that meaningful work has a reward
and i think we know that because we know
that meaning less work has no reward and
i think everyone at some point in their
life has done some form of meaningless
work whether that was you tapping away
on the buttons in a corporate company
whether that was you
doing paperwork and filing an admin for
that office job you did one summer or
whether you were flipping burgers and
doing you know frying fries or whatever
it was like everyone's done something
that didn't satisfy them and by the way
all of those things i've just said could
be really satisfying to someone else
and that's the crazy thing about passion
that it's not linked to a particular
activity for everyone it could be
completely different there's a great
study from the yale school of management
that i talk about in the book
and amy vroznuski and her team tried to
find work that they thought would be
considered challenging
and they found that they looked at
hospital cleaners and hospital workers
because they thought that might be some
of the challenging and sometimes the the
filthy work that people may have to do
can you imagine like cleaning up after
people pass away or cleaning up after
they just
like urinate or whatever it may be
they're cleaning bed sheets they're
cleaning toilets
and so they asked some of the people
that worked in these hospitals to define
their job
most of them as expected said
meaningless
insignificant low skilled
and basically they read their personnel
manual
the interesting thing is they asked the
same question to people
different people doing the same job
but this time the answer was different
these
different people doing the same job said
that they did highly skilled work it was
highly fulfilling and they saw
themselves as healers they saw
themselves as carers
and they saw themselves as
transformative in the healing process of
their patients
because they saw themselves in
connection to someone actually
recovering and being better
the whole notion of dharma
to me hit home really hard in that story
in the book and you talk about one of
the people in particular who was
changing like the photographs out for
people so that they had something new to
see and somebody asked her like is that
part of your job
and what was her response i thought this
this summed up dharma for me in a really
visceral way
yeah it was it's not part of my job
it's how i see my job right it's how i
perceive what i do and the term is job
crafting
where you have assigned meaning
to the task you've assigned meaning
to the experience that you're now
fueling that work
rather than letting the job description
be your only definition of it yeah when
she was stepping into that and saying
like okay i knowing who i am and knowing
how i feel and what it means to me to
take care of this person to look at a
small detail like that and to imbue this
thing which somebody else might think of
as you know sort of a gross job or
whatever but to bring the beauty that i
want to bring to it um
it it's me recognizing she didn't use
the words dharma but it's me recognizing
my purpose it's me
like not asking what's the definition of
the job but instead how do i bring my
truest purpose the unique way that i
would do this job and bring that to this
situation now this is where your book
got really interesting for me is this
interesting interplay between
there's a uh
a sense of your essence who you are
and then there is
bringing that into the things that you
do and so you could take something you
talk about like cleaning the um the
monastery like in the tiny tiny little
ways but how what you would do is you
would think about cleaning this i
imagine myself cleaning my my own heart
and so now it becomes not actually
polishing a monastery it becomes like
the spiritual pursuit of
recognizing one that even as you get to
the end of cleaning it's dirty again and
so it's this continual thing but that
was
that that
being able to begin to tease those
things out that some things will seem
really boring and dull but you can imbue
them with meaning and then there's this
thing inside of you that when you align
to the things that you like and that you
enjoy
is like the the sort of raw response is
there but you can also create a response
yeah and how do you
help people like bring those together
you talked a little bit about it with
job crafting but how do you get people
out of a woe is me mentality into
you know finding ways to to make their
life beautiful i really believe that you
have to seek
the love and the beauty that you want
in what you have now
because that way you're training
yourself
to extract meaning right now which means
in the short term
if you can
like those hospital workers we're doing
if you can fill that role with meaning
and your true passion and what's coming
from you
then that's going to lead you to
discovering the power of it and i saw
that in my own life when i came back
from being a monk and i worked in the
corporate world
i was teaching meditation and
mindfulness and the things that i talked
today
in the corporate world
and i remember in 2014 i was invited by
one of our executives to teach
mindfulness
to a thousand of my peers at twickenham
rugby stadium
and i was speaking in between the ceo
and will greenwood who won the rugby
world cup with england
and and i'm sitting there in the
audience as a complete nobody
and completely around people who are my
same age we all make the same money no
one knows who i am
and there i'm sitting there going how am
i going to share mindfulness but after
doing that experience i realized that
even though my job was digital strategy
and social media innovation and i was a
consultant
i was bringing my passion to the
workplace
which actually gave me confidence that i
could do this outside of the workplace
and that's how the two ideas connect
that when you find how you can apply it
to your small world you then get the
confidence and the courage to take it
out and make something real of it
whereas i think a lot of us are waiting
for that break to get into doing it in
reality but we actually haven't even
tested it or experimented on it in a
small space where we can develop our
own confidence and courage around it so
i think there's there's two things that
um are going to be important for people
to understand if their your book reads
like a how-to manual which to me is is
the ultimate power in a book and there's
two things you touch on that play into
this and one of them is the monkey mind
and then the other is what you just
talked about with strengths now the
reason i see those two things is coming
together is a lot of times people
they don't know what their strengths are
or maybe they haven't even spent time
developing their strengths
and the monkey mind is either saying
it's unfair that things are so hard for
you that you have to develop them it's
unfair that you know at the ashram i was
because i know that you had health
trouble at the ashram which sort of
began this process of maybe i'm not
meant to be here forever and so some
people are going to be it's unfair that
that happened for me and that i find
myself you know now at accenture which
is exactly what i was trying to avoid
and
and or it's
the thought of speaking between the ceo
and this famous rugby player spins them
off into
um
impostor syndrome and i'm never going to
be able to do this and the anxiety takes
flight and then they just aren't able to
do it so how do you help people
develop their strengths and recognize
what their strengths are in the first
place and calm that monkey mind so that
they can see clearly
this is this is why i love tom
you're just amaze i mean tommy you're
literally explaining my book for me i'm
just like this is like the biggest
master class of the book it's great uh
no and you're spot on that
the monkey mind is what we all
experience every day so the monkey mind
is jumping from branch to branch it
doesn't want to focus on the root of the
issue it wants to find the next banana
it wants to find the next excuse it
wants to find the next instant
gratification right that's the monkey
mind and so the monkey mind is never
going to help you
focus on your strengths
and the reason going back to one of the
earlier questions you ask the reason why
we struggle to find our passion
is because the world has constantly
pushed us away from our strengths
we've constantly told to focus on your
weaknesses oh you've got three a's and a
d you should be working on that d let's
get that up to an a
right i remember
in my school
they had this excruciating exercise
where you'd be ranked
1 to 180
on every subject every year
and they'd send the list home to your
parents so there were 180 students in my
year group and every subject art math
english science geography history you
name it you were ranked 1 to 180 in
every subject based on your test results
and scores
and that was like painful when my
parents received that and the crazy
thing was i would always outperform
always
in art design philosophy and economics i
was in english i was always in the top
half if not in the top quarter if not in
the top five
right of my whole year group and stuff
like science and geography and math i
was kind of like in the middle
and and towards the bottom end of my
year now granted i went to a competitive
school so i was still okay at those
things
but the interesting thing was that my
parents and my friends parents
would never look at what you came one or
two or three in they'd be looking at the
things you came 90 100 and 110 in and so
we've all been programmed to say oh your
strengths are they're fine they're good
the way they are but why are you not
performing at this
and so the one way to know your
strengths
is to ask yourself what do you do
that you feel the most confidence doing
and it could be something as simple as
i'm great at organizing birthday parties
it could be like that may be your skill
right that may be your strength or it
may be something like i'm really good at
putting on makeup
or it could be that i have a great sense
of fashion
it could be any of those things and if
you don't know it yet
you can also do an exercise where you
sit down with a colleague a family
member and a friend
because you need people from all areas
of your life and you ask them what do
you think i do
that i excel in that i stand out in or
if you could trust me to do one thing
in your life for you what would that one
thing be
and when you ask that to people in a
reflective way really asking for that
presence
you might be surprised by what they say
and that's such a powerful question to
ask because someone may actually say
something like to you like jay i think
your greatest strength is
just knowing what to say to me when i
most need it
and you may think well that's not a
strength you can do anything with
but it is
it is a strength that you can do a lot
with if you are okay with accepting that
of course i want someone to say to me oh
jay you're you're an athlete like
cristiano ronaldo and you could play
football and get the ballon d'or and win
all these trip but that's not my reality
and so i feel that that's
the place that i would start with
strengths
and there was a great study done on
the healthy wealthy and wisest people in
the world
and they were asked if you could
invest in what you're good at
your average at or what you're bad at
where would you put your money and so if
you take a hundred percent how would you
divide that as a ratio
and if you ask this i want everyone
who's listening and watching at home
right now to do this exercise
and you may write down 33 33 33 you may
write down 40 40 20 you may write down
10 10 80. whatever you write down the
most healthy wealthy wisest successful
people on the planet will say theirs is
a hundred zero zero or eighty ten ten
they go all in on their strengths
because they know that if they go all in
on their strengths they can become
exceptional at it
now here's the caveat
when it comes to your hard skills focus
on your strengths but when it comes to
your soft skills focus on your
weaknesses now you got to tell me which
is which yes so hard skills are things
like excel math
uh product design
using a video camera uh script writing
speaking these are all hard skills in
the sense that they're
very clearly defined very tangible
you can really measure them it's almost
like a skill that's measurable your soft
skills are like emotional intelligence
listening
compassion
empathy these are all soft skills or
considered soft skills and those are
where you focus on your weaknesses
because they can actually end up
tripping you up while you're trying to
become the best at doing the hard skill
so you may be the best videographer in
the world but if you don't know how to
listen to your community and your team
then no one's going to want to work with
you
and so to me that's the missing link
that we're actually the other way around
we put all our emphasis on getting
better at our weaknesses and our hard
skills
and we think that because we're
empathetic and good people that that
will be enough and it doesn't work that
way
that's one of the things that i loved
about your book is there's a real
so you spend three years in an ashram
removed from everything but end up
coming back and obviously had spent your
entire youth thinking that you were
going to go on the same path that most
people growing up and london or any
other industrialized nation is going to
end up not taking that path think it's
forever end up coming back and so
there's this real understanding of the
duality of you have a spiritual life but
then you also have to pay bills and keep
the lights on and
so that um the way that you handle the
collision of those two elements i found
really really interesting no for sure
and and
i mean it dude the book is usable like
if people put it to use in their life
their lives really will be better and
part of
what i like is the way that you're
walking people through
this is how you identify your strengths
right so asking your friend your
colleague your i forget the threat yeah
family thank you um and beginning to
you're giving people things to do in
order to get to the things that they're
going to need in order to move towards
fulfillment now i'm putting that word in
your mouth i actually don't you don't
harp on fulfillment a lot in the book so
if you had to say what the punch line is
like why are people working this hard
what are they working towards
exactly
i think the two things that we're all
working towards is a sense of peace
and a sense of purpose
peace is for yourself and purposes for
the world and i think we all exist in
both places
and i think where we go wrong
is that we try to live life in an either
or
and this was one of the most beautiful
lessons that i learned as a monk the
life was about self and about service
there was no either or it wasn't
disconnected or divided you couldn't
live a life of complete selfishness
and expect to be happy that wouldn't
work
even if you look at like hedonism if you
look at it as a philosophy of life or
hedonism however it's pronounced here
but if you look at that as a philosophy
of life which is let's just accumulate
let's just hoard and let's just
celebrate on my own
we know people and stories about people
who will not be satisfied that way to
just have you're one of them you and
lisa and i and i can say this honestly
and i said this to liz the other day are
two of the most generous
loving
people and humble people that i know
despite all your success and incredible
achievement and that's what endears
people to you it's not what you have
that endears people that may endear some
people to you but what keeps the right
people around is that you both have
these human qualities because you want
to serve you want to help you want to
support and collaborate and so for me i
feel like we either live and then we
leave the opposite the other opposite
life is our life is just about giving
it's just about service it's just about
helping
that's not sustainable either and so to
me
i've discovered through real monk wisdom
that life is actually embracing
polarities
it's actually about doing a dance and
knowing which way to go at the right
time so i believe as much in strategy
as i do in sincerity
and i believe in much as generosity
as i do in generating value for myself
and i believe as much in giving as i do
in growing and i think as soon as you
start to say no it's either or you have
to choose i think that's where we start
to lose a part of ourselves and that's
why i add that compassion to passion
because i know a lot of people who do
what they
are passionate about
but actually lack meaning and purpose in
their life
because they
haven't turned it into a service tell me
some of the stories about the way that
monks tap into purpose and service it's
something service is something that
comes up in the book a lot
what is the power of service and how can
we without going to an ashram how can we
take our strengths and really give them
purpose and meaning
yeah so
one of the biggest things with service
in the ashram is service is a part of
your daily routine so there is no choice
about whether you serve or not
so that's a really great way to live
because you're almost exposed to lots of
different types of service so some of
that would be cooking
for the homeless or underprivileged
children who don't have access to warm
meals some of it would be building
sustainable villages inside which people
can live and villagers can find a home
and an economy so you're always
connected to doing something for others
but here if i was gonna ask a monk why
are we doing this what would they say
they would say because i believe that
you have to see how you can be useful to
others so the dalai lama probably puts
the best that
really we're born to help others and if
we can't help them at least don't hurt
them
and to me that really sums it up
that
we're born to help others we're born
with different gifts with different
geniuses with different talents to
improve the lives of others
and the question i always get from
someone in the audience who wants to ask
me an awkward question will be and
there's always one right and so the
person will say well jay how does
someone who has nothing in india or
africa do this like someone in in like a
really slum situation or a village
situation and they're always they'll
always pick on india and africa i'm not
saying those and i'll be like no but
this isn't for them i'm speaking to an
audience
that has
education that has resources that has
network like i'm speaking to people who
can make a difference so anyone who is
in that area of society
has a responsibility so
anything that you're given in life
you're seen as a caretaker of
and the way you take the best care of it
is that you use it in the service of
others and that purifies you from
becoming attached to it and it feeling
like it actually eats you alive
and feeds your ego
as opposed to you now being purified and
cleansed of wealth success fame status
or time or whatever you have an energy
and you're now using it for the highest
cause so that's what they would say they
would say it's the highest cause of
using what i've been given
in the service of others whatever you've
been given
there's a couple things in there let's
see if i can get to them both so one in
the book you do talk about
somebody
mother or something she was a woman she
was married at 12 she ends up having
multiple children at she's abused yeah
so at one point she's pregnant he puts
her in a cow barn she gives birth in the
the umbilical cord with a rock
and then ends up going and living on the
street now this is somebody who has
nothing nothing nothing yeah but yet
ends up
finding joy in being able and she starts
begging for other people yeah because
she can see just how hard other people
have it so when you were telling that
story that you know people are trying to
sort of pin you down of like you know
what can the the lowest of the low
really do
even there because there's something so
ingrained in the human condition that
neurologically you are going to be
rewarded for helping somebody in
whatever way even if all you can offer
them is a smile there really is like
just a neurological feedback loop which
is
super powerful yeah her name is
sindhutai sakpal
and oh her story is just heart-wrenching
like that story should be a movie maybe
we need to make that into a documentary
movie because that story of like
literally as you described it like she's
pregnant she's kicked out of her home
her husband abuses her while she's
pregnant she then gives birth on the
street like you said cuts with her
umbilical cord with a rock
and then goes on to build an orphanage
and
allows her husband who ends up being
broken on the streets into her orphanage
as one of the orphans not as her husband
i mean it's it's a mind-blowing story
and it's real and she's just this sweet
old lady and she's not done that as a
personal brand or to like you know she
doesn't that's not her video she's like
the sushi is and and to me it's like
that is such a beautiful reminder to us
all that even feel even when you feel
like you have nothing to give
you still have something to give
and i think that's one of our challenges
that we're not exposed to enough stories
we're not experiencing enough of these
amazing stories of incredible human
feats and that's why the book is full of
other people's stories not just mine of
people that inspire me every time i go
through pain i think of sindhutai
right like that pushes me through
yeah that that to me is
it
was a perfect example of something you
say explicitly in the book which is the
answer is always service you're like
whatever you don't have to tell me the
problem the answer to service yeah like
if you're having a bad day service you
know if you're winning service it's like
whatever's going on service is the thing
that's going to make you i don't know if
you said feel better but i that was how
i interpreted it when i think about
one of the things you talk a little bit
about joy explicitly but i would say an
undercurrent through the whole book for
me was hey everybody reading this you
have a monkey mind and that monkey mind
really makes [__] hard you can be
winning you can have everything and
you're comparing yourself to somebody
else and that's dragging you down or you
could be doing it for the wrong reasons
so it just feels sort of dark and icky
and it's like ah you're like i'm not
even passing judgment on that i'm just
saying i know the way the human mind
works and so i know where people are
going to struggle because i have
struggled and continue to struggle and
it's
some of this is just a recognition of
the human condition and coming at it
from a place of i can just predict that
wherever you're at if you lean into
service then it's going to change things
but what i like is that angle of leaning
into service with skills that are unique
to you
and that became really powerful i'd love
to hear the moment where
you seek counsel because you're thinking
not sure that i'm
meant to stay in the ashram
and the advice you get and how you sort
of re-conceive of your own identity as
you
transition out yeah so it's it's weird
the way it sounds but becoming a monk
was my biggest dream growing up from
that time period that i made the monk 18
which we spoke about the last time i was
here and so that became like my identity
from 18 to 22 and then 22 to 25 when i
lived as a monk so it's like that's been
my identity for seven years at least in
my heart in my head
and so when you get to the end of a
self-awareness journey which is actually
the beginning but you get to the end of
it because you're like oh i'm not a monk
anymore and i'm sure you've gone through
similar things like oh i'm not a ceo
anymore of this right of a business that
does this or someone else may go through
i'm not married anymore i'm now divorced
i am now not single anymore or i'm not
uh alone i've got kids right it's like
we all go through these identity
transitions in our life
and to me
going from being a monk to not being a
monk was the hardest transition that i'd
been through at that time
and the question that i'm having is
i'm having reflections on who i truly am
and what my skills are what my strengths
are what my passion is what my
compassion is and i'm saying i want to
share all of this in like a cool way
through entertainment and i love movies
and that's what the book's full of like
pop culture references and it's it's a
it's it's who i am and what i love about
myself and then i'm going but this
doesn't align with what monk life is
meant to be in a sacred way
and that is like looking in the mirror
and going oh like i'm not comfortable
with that so when i share that with my
teacher and we're having this discussion
he's his advice and i think this is the
part that you're referring to he says to
me that
there's
students that come to university
and then they become professors
and there are students that come to the
university and then they go out and
become entrepreneurs
or go out and work and he says which do
you think are better
i'm like i mean neither really like i
can't really choose what makes someone
better
and he was just like that's the point
you you came here
some people stay at the monastery and go
on to become senior monks and teachers
and some people will go out and do what
they do outside and he goes but neither
is better and it was the simplest advice
it's one of those pieces of advice that
it's all about the person that says it
and not necessarily what you're hearing
but for me it just clarified the
judgment i had
the
attachment i had
that i could only be happy and
purposeful in this way
and that's really what we're all
struggling with that currently we all
have a projector screen up here that
goes this is what life's meant to look
like for it to be happy and then down
here we have the reality version of what
life actually looks like and we go oh no
they don't match that doesn't match
that's not working that means i'm going
down the wrong direction
the funny thing is the version you have
doesn't exist at all it's just an
imagination it's it's virtual reality
and the reality that you're experiencing
could actually be getting you closer to
that goal than you even think but you
just don't want to go down that path
because it doesn't look like the one you
imagine and that's where i was at
i was having to go down a path that i
didn't imagine looked like success but
then the question is well what does
success look like then and it definitely
doesn't look like the version in your
head
so to me i started to realize and i
genuinely believe this and your
affirmation is very useful to me the
three years of my life
living as a monk were like being at
monk's school
and the last seven years have been the
exam
and everything in this book is stuff
that i've tried and tested in the last
seven years i learned it among school
but i tested it in in reality
and i'm only sharing what in the last
seven years it's perfectly worked for me
to feel like i'm exactly where i need to
be
that doesn't mean i don't have off days
that doesn't mean that i'm happy all the
time it doesn't mean that i don't get
angry it doesn't mean that i don't get
upset but i'm going in the direction
that i want to be going in
so speaking of that it doesn't mean that
i don't get upset i think this is a
really important thing it it it is what
makes you
so accessible and what makes you such a
powerful voice in this generation where
it's like for me growing up in my 20s a
monk was somebody bawled in robes that
maybe you bumped into at the airport who
gave you like a flower and then asked
for a donation like that was a monk
right so now seeing somebody like you
who's integrated into the real world but
you tell the story in the book which i i
really won your super open vulnerable
maybe has weird connotations but you
were just not worried about whether the
story made you look cool or not you were
just like this is the thing i struggled
with and i was worried about that
whatever and this is my sort of
recursive why why do i want this what am
i worried about um and you
begin to realize the things that are
bothering you and one thing happened
early on when you got there and you said
that you were hurt that you were giving
yourself to other people and you didn't
feel like it was being reciprocated
the the way that
the monk came back to re-contextualize
that for you i found
really important and this is staying on
the steam of the monkey mind which we're
gonna come back to here in a second so
but if you can tell that story i think
it'd be really powerful
yeah i think we all get into these
scenarios in the world where we think
we're trying our best to help and love
other people so i think majority of
people feel
like they give more than they get
and i think anyone who's an empath or
feels like they care for others will
feel i give out so much love but i don't
get as much back
and that's how i felt sometimes in the
ashram now the interesting thing is that
i'd forgotten lesson number one in the
ashram and the first lesson in the
ashram was
this is a hospital
there are doctors and patients
but remember the doctors are also
patients
and sometimes the patients may teach the
doctors
but remember that we're all
in the same space in this hospital where
everyone is going through a process of
purification
so that was very clear the ashram was
not meant to be heaven it wasn't meant
to be this idyllic place where everyone
was perfectly zen and calm it was a
place where you had to
learn to develop that even amongst the
challenges that were there just like in
reality so i'd forgotten that and i was
going well i'm giving out lots of love
and no one's giving me any love and it
was really emotional for me because i
just felt like i was investing in people
and helping people and supporting people
and and i'll never forget that
conversation and even till this day it's
become one of those conversations that
stays with me and i remind myself of
regularly hence i put in the book
the monk said to me he said
just as there are people
that you love
and don't love you back
there are people in your life that are
investing in you and loving you
that you've forgotten about
and it was one of those like
stop moments of just
is that true
and i would encourage everyone who's
listening and watching right now to
really think about that think about that
person you've been chasing whether it's
a friend a potential boyfriend or
girlfriend a potential husband or wife
or whatever it may be your job
and then ask yourself has someone ever
chased you in life or if someone ever
pursued you in life or if someone ever
tried to love you in life and you didn't
even give them a time of day
the answer is true i could agree with it
i can completely agree with that there
are people in my life who have done more
for me
than i could even begin to try and do
and that isn't just parents and family
members i'm talking about people
professionally that i just can't repay
and so
he spoke about it as a theme called the
circle of love that you will always
get the love you give out you will
always get it back or whatever you give
out you will always get it back you just
won't get it back from the same people
you give it to
and that was really fascinating to me
because i also realized
that i may have caused hurt to people
and they may not have hurt me back
but i've received her from people that i
never heard
and so it works both ways both with her
and love and when you see it on both
ends and that's ultimately karma in a in
a tiny nutshell
it's
completely grounding
in saying yeah let me take a real look
at my life
and and where those blind spots are
about who i'm not being grateful to
who i'm missing who i'm not expressing
thanks to
i want to pull some of these threads
together now yeah okay so i love it
you've got the what i'm shorthanding to
the monkey mind which is beliefs that
don't serve you the nature of the mind
to want to covet to compare like all
these things that are
going to take you down we're probably
going to need to get into values of
values down values
but
putting that in the monkey mind category
the things that drive you nuts that
worry you that wake you up in the middle
of the night
and then you've got this
idea of
beginning to unlearn like so much of
what is
the the lessons that you do in the book
and that you've been saying here today
are often not so much as as giving you
something but taking something away and
saying you're you're thinking about it
in a way that's not helpful that feeds
the monkey mind instead of feeding peace
to get back to your earlier the pursuit
that we're after is peace
tell me the zen story the pouring of the
tea which
is so illustrative of i think exactly
a large portion of what your book is
meant to convey
so
the zen story about the tea and i love
zen stories and the books full of them
as as you know
uh the zen story is where a student
approaches a zen master and a teacher
and is complaining about all the
challenges in their life
and everything they've got going on
and feels like they also have a sense of
ego if they know everything that's
happening
and zen master sees a cup that's full
there
and starts pouring tea into this cup
and the cup just starts overflowing and
the students looking at it going like
what are you doing like how does this
make any sense
and and the zen master says well you're
just like this cup right i can't put any
more in you can't take any more in
because you're already full like you
think you're full you think you're done
and and that's the point that you have
to always go back to that student
mindset you have to always go back to
that emptiness and i think one of the
reasons why we struggle with that is we
think that when we're full we're safe
our ego makes us believe that when
you're full when you think you know it
all that's when you're safe
the craziest thing is that's when you're
at your weakest
and i think that's what we all miss that
when you think if you think of any
company that's ever thought that they
had figured it out that is when they
were at their most
weakest point if there's a fighter in a
boxing match that thinks that they have
perfected this game
that's when that their weakest when
you're in a relationship and you think
oh my life is perfect and everything's
going great that's when you're at your
weakest but we find safety in
certainty when actually that's what
makes us complacent and lose the plot so
that story illustrates the need
to always reconnect not that we're empty
that we have nothing
but that there is so much more to gain
there is so much more to learn
yeah that that idea of
if you if you already think you have all
this figured out then i'm not going to
be able to help you so if somebody is
watching this right now with sort of a
cynical eye to yeah i've heard this
before been there done that tried that
you know i'm suffering from anxiety
depression
but jay doesn't know my circumstances
one of the things you talk about is is
how people can begin to slide into a
victim mentality
how how do you help people around that
why
some people really do have it bad so why
do you advise them still to not adopt
the victim mentality
yeah so there's a study that i talk
about in the book that looks at people
who have a victim mindset and by the way
that is a
condition that's adopted you are not a
victim person like you're not a negative
person you just have adopted a negative
sense of thoughts and habits and beliefs
and the study looked at people that had
those beliefs and looked to people who
didn't
and they were asked to think of a time
when they felt they were the victim and
the other people were just asked to
think of a time when they were bored
after that these two sets of people were
asked if they'd like to take part in an
activity of just helping the team that
had created the experiment
and
i think the people that were the victim
mindset were 25 percent less likely to
offer to help and be a part of this
change and to the degree that sometimes
they left trash behind and even took the
pens that they were given by the
experimenters to the point that you get
so lost in that mentality that you don't
even think about helping and getting out
of it so the reason why the victim
mindset
it is real in the sense that there are
definitely people
in the world
that have a harder situation than others
that's fact there's no
debating that point that there are
people who have it are harder than other
people there are people that have hired
it harder than me but there are also
people that have it easier than me so
i've had it harder than some and same
with you
and
in our small bubbles our hardship feels
like the worst thing that could ever
happen
and that's the craziest thing about pain
is that you only think pain is bad when
you're really going through it and we
compare our pain with other people's
pain
we say oh that person's pain can't be
that bad
that person's pain that's probably a bit
less than mine you know we because we've
never experienced it
so the reason why i encourage people to
get out of that mindset
is because that's just a one-way ticket
to a lifelong commitment
to sadness disappointment
lethargy complacency and feeling stuck
and lost there's nothing gained
out of feeling sorry for yourself
i don't think there's anyone that i've
ever heard say and i'm open to it but
i've never heard anyone say to me that
feeling like a victim my whole life
actually helped me find a victory in
life like i don't think i've ever heard
that i've never read that in a book i've
never heard in a documentary i've never
seen it anywhere so if it's out there
i'm open to it but
when you look at that and you go is this
the life i want to keep living do i
still want to feel this way you look at
someone like sindhutai you look at all
of these incredible people that have
broken barriers you look at people who
are told that wilma rudolph was told she
would never
walk again properly or run at age nine
and went went on to be a multiple
olympic gold medalist when you hear that
you're like what really but that's
what's possible
and so no one in the victim mindset has
ever
seen growth from that mindset
but everyone who has traded that victim
mindset for a mindset of acceptance
a mindset of healing
and a mindset of perspective
has found their way out
and the mistake we make is we take tell
people
what it's almost like toxic mindset
advice or it's like oh stop stop feeling
sorry for yourself just go out there and
do the work
that doesn't work either because that
person needs to accept that they've been
through something painful for themselves
so you can't belittle or devalue
someone's pain
and often people try and belittle and
devalue their own pain to get out of it
but that actually just slows down the
process and then they're back to square
one again so you've got to accept the
pain you went through you've got to
accept that you want to heal it one of
the best ways to explain this is
how what we search for in our partners
or in life
is what we did or didn't get from our
parents
that's interesting like literally what
we search for and i've i've analyzed
this in my life a ton and others if you
look for what you look for in your
partner or for what you look for in life
through your bosses any authorities
anyone who has a position of power in
your life is what you didn't or did get
from your parents
and so you're creating a life based on
your past trauma or your past challenge
that doesn't lead to a positive
relationship i found myself projecting
the patterns the negative patterns that
my parents had into my relationship with
my wife
that doesn't create a positive
experience and by the way i'm not
blaming any parents in the world
everyone's figuring it out so i'm not
even blaming my own but we need to have
the awareness of developing the
emotional skills that our parents didn't
have
so again reminding ourselves of being
aware
that we're literally creating lives that
will continue in the same direction
unless our mindset changes
all right so if we know that people are
struggling with the monkey mind they um
they're telling they're filling their
cup up with a lot of things that are
self-destructive maybe too big of a word
but it's directionally correct that
things that aren't leading them to joy
to peace
um
how do we bring the ashram to them how
do we go about you know
beginning the process of healing i know
a big part of your journey was questions
questions questions questions questions
what are the right questions
do we have to meditate is that optional
do we have to give up sex like where
where did we fall when you got to that
part in the book i had to laugh out loud
so what how do we bring the ashram to
people how do we help them like now
start doing things specifically to empty
their cup to refill it with something
that's going to lead to
to peace and to joy and yeah the first
thing i'd say is i think everyone needs
the feeling that they can just come up
for some air
life can often feel like someone's
literally
drowning you and you feel like you're
drowning and floundering especially if
you're in an extreme case of anxiety or
stress or depression
and i feel like you just need to feel
like you can just come up for a tiny bit
of air so for that in the book i talk
about the 3s model which is your sights
sense and sounds
what we see
what we hear and what we smell has a
profound impact on our mental state and
we actually underestimate our sense and
i'll give you an example all of us have
been walking around with masks and
someone said this to me the other day
and it hit me
they were saying to me that now that we
all were lost and do this the whole time
i think my mom's over there they were
doing this all the time they realized
they couldn't hear people properly
and the reason they couldn't hear people
properly is they realize they don't use
their ears they use their eyes to see
people's lips
and so actually they're not even using
their ears that much they're using their
eyes to follow the lips and know what
someone's saying
so actually we depend so much on our
eyes
in every interaction
how many times have you been looking at
someone attractive and you forgot what
they were talking about
right you're just so engaged with your
eyes that you completely even forgot to
listen
right or you're so lost in in the vision
of something again and you're in a daze
you can't smell anything you can't taste
anything
so
we've got to learn to reactivate our
senses so i'll give an example of what i
mean as monks
our life was sight designed
sound designed and scent designed
what's the first thing you see when you
wake up in the morning for 80 of people
the first thing they see in the morning
is their phone and the last thing they
see at night is their phone that is poor
sight design because you don't even
choose what the first message of the day
your mind receives that actually made my
stomach drop
that's a gnarly thought it's true yeah
right imagine the last thing someone
sees is not their partner or their
spouse
the person they sleep with they see
their phone and the first thing in the
morning they look at is their phone and
guess what it's not a good site because
you're looking at a message that you
didn't design for your mind you're
looking at a picture or an image that
maybe came through on your instagram
feed that you didn't choose for your
mind so now you've started your jay with
envy jealousy comparison competition
collab like all of the all of the monkey
mind stuff and the monkey mind is
excited the monkey mind's on the monkey
mind's like yeah we're ready to go and
now you started the day with the monkey
mind so my advice is
start your day with a quote that you
love
start your day with a picture of someone
that you love or your family start your
day with a work of art that inspires you
start your day with seeing the first
thing that you see make it so closely
connected to your soul and your goal and
your purpose
that your monk mind naturally comes
alive
so as monks
the first thing that we saw was
sometimes a teaching that we'd keep next
to us it might be a spiritual text where
i just ripped it out of a book and stuck
it there next to my bed so i woke up to
that
just wake up to something that you
actually want to see when you wake up
and make it intentional and make it
focus it could even be a reminder on a
sticky note i remember for a long time i
had one when i was a monk that said i am
not this body
just to disconnect from the fact that i
was more than this body and because we
didn't have mirrors in the ashram it was
very easy to forget i was this body
or i've had other ones where that say to
me i'm exactly where i need to be and
i've read that in the morning
and that just reminds me because so
often i wake up feeling anxious that i'm
behind on my day or i'm late and then i
actually make up a mess whereas if i
read i'm exactly where i need to be and
i remind myself i can start my day there
so that's sight
this and that's simple easy for anyone
to do you don't have to change your mind
you don't need to meditate you don't
have to do anything the second one is
let's talk about scent design now one of
the things i've been missing during
quarantine is going to a spa or going to
like a resort because i love
massages and i love spas and like me and
my wife love getting away
and if you think about it whenever you
go into a spa or a massage space or
whatever they're called or a resort
you can always feel relaxed from the
moment you walk in just through the
power of scent
it could be the most basic room in the
world
but a scent can literally illuminate a
whole room so sense like eucalyptus
lavender sandalwood if you've got a
diffuser or a candle and you can make
this a part of your routine before you
start your work day just have a candle
that you breathe in for four seconds and
breathe out for four seconds
have a diffuser in your room
that just makes you feel calm because as
soon as you walk in one thing i've been
doing is putting eucalyptus drops into
my showers and turning into a natural
steam and i just feel like completely
relieving all my sinuses and and feeling
calm these are just really practical
things you can do to just ease yourself
into it and the third one's sound this
one's so powerful
sound is underestimated because now we
just have
music playing all the time in the
background and the music may not even be
intentional and the lyrics are all over
the place and
you've got instruments that are not
being played well or in harmony and you
get a pump or like a
boost out of it and i've i learned about
sound in the ashram and we had sound
design we would wake up to nature sounds
and nature's so aligned with your body
and mind if you look at nature if you
breathe in with the ocean
your breath will just be exactly where
it needs to be
if you
allow yourself to just be present with
the wind you'll feel your body just slow
right down and be calm nature just has
this amazing way of teaching so many
lessons
and so when i lived in new york city i
often found myself getting exhausted and
i started looking into it i was thinking
what is it i work out i do all this
stuff and i realized that especially in
new york we deal with a lot of
insignificant sound you know something
called cognitive load where your brain
is processing
irrelevant insignificant sound of trucks
horns construction work and drilling
and so when your ears are trying to make
sense of insignificant sound you're
losing energy
in an irrelevant way
and so sound design means every room in
your home
have a song that plays or music that
plays in that room that gives you the
feeling you want it to have
another easy way to do that is before
you start work or while you're working
have a song or a playlist that really
gets you into the mode that you want to
be in when you're doing that
sound is a beautiful accomplice to any
activity you want so those are three
simple ways that anyone starting today
can bring the ashram to their home by
sight scent and sound design because
that's how our lives were designed
now what about things like the
taking a chore washing dishes um
servicing the animals like
should people build something into their
day where it's like i'm gonna do this
thing that i don't necessarily like but
i'm gonna imbue it with something to
remind myself that even in a task as
mundane as washing dishes i can be fully
present i can um you know find the joy
in doing it well and i think you talk
about watching it go you know from
grease cover to you know just sparkling
clean and just sort of
re-contextualizing is that
a powerful thing that that people should
work in like i want to create that like
perfect
day like we're you know like how do we
how do we make full monk use of our
quarantine i love it i love it yeah no
absolutely i think i'm trying to think
of things that everyone does i think
washing your dishes is something
everyone does every day or it's a common
thing that people do
and
you've got to realize that what you're
doing is not washing the dish like in
terms of that's not actually what you're
doing what you're doing is training your
mind for presents
and the reason why that's so powerful is
because most of us when we're washing
the dishes i need to watch that netflix
show i've got 30 minutes before you know
like i'm going to sleep late if i don't
see it so now you're already trying to
figure out what you're doing next
and that bleeds into the rest of your
life
so now when you're finally on that guess
what this is it everyone's going through
quarantine and lockdown going i need to
travel i need to travel i need to get
out and when you live like that when
you're traveling you'll be thinking i
need to do work i need to get back to
work i need to get my career back on
track and when you're at work you're
going to be like i need to get away
again and that's literally the
repetitive cycle that we're all living
in so when you're just washing your dish
in a present way you're not washing a
dish you're training your mind to be
where you physically are
and the best way to do that is give it
meaning like you said or
do something that makes you more present
at the time you could if you really
wanted to
wash the dish and listen to your
favorite song you could watch this and
listen to this podcast you could watch
the edition do something that is good
for your mind that helps you be more
present and conscious at the time
so you may say i don't have enough time
to wash the dishes for 10 minutes like
one dish for 10 minutes and i'm not
asking you to do that what i'm saying is
don't constantly be in a rush
to get onto something you want to do
because then when you're doing what you
want to do you'll be in a rush to get on
a thing you have to do and that cycle
never stops and and i think that's the
never-ending cycle that we're in that we
always feel
we're ahead or behind
we always feel whenever we're meant to
be
and that's the root of all of our
suffering in life
is that i don't feel i am where i
actually are meant to be
jay your book is such an extraordinary
piece of showing people how to create a
road for themselves how to empty the cup
and fill it up with something that
really really has a shot at walking them
somewhere
extraordinary and beautiful dude i was
way impressed
we
have only scratched the surface of
what's in the book so i hope that people
will really give this a shot
obviously i did the audible version
which is you actually reading it which
is really fun hearing you you have that
four word phrase that you give people in
terms of the meditation that you repeat
which hearing you actually saying it
there there was something uh deeply
comforting about that so i think that
yeah that people really get into it
thank you for coming thank you for
writing the book dude i think that if
people read it put it to use that it
really will be transformative so yeah
gladly wrote it i'm glad that you're
putting it out now i know it was
probably tempting to wait until the
world had gotten back to normal but
maybe now more important than ever
um so
well played my friend where can people
find you where can they get the book
yeah the best place is think like a
monkbook.com
that's the website for the book and the
book's actually going to be released in
around 40 languages so if you want to
read it in your own language you can
find that too
so you can find it on amazon in your own
language if you prefer that uh we had it
of course translated i do not speak
every language so there's no order
there's no audible version in the 40
languages it's only audible in english
but think like among book.com and you
can get everything there and i want to
say thank you to you tom because
you know i i feel like the preparation
you do like just for everyone who
doesn't know and obviously you can tell
from the interview but if you don't know
this about tom tom listened to the whole
audiobook before this interview so he's
done 10 hours of listening because he
listened to on double speed
to actually do this interview and that
is just
it just shows he doesn't have to do that
we're friends like tom could have
flicked through the book
and he could have asked me a few
questions and he knows me well enough to
talk about this stuff anyway he doesn't
really need to read the book like
genuinely he doesn't need to read the
book he knows me well enough to ask me
good questions and he's a great
interviewer but the fact that he goes
through that just shows you
what level he wants to play on and i
think that should not be underestimated
i think it's so easy to get to where tom
is in his career and to wing it to just
go for it and i've seen this at
conferences where you stay out the last
you turn up the first i've seen it again
and again man and uh i just you're
relentless in in the most amazing gentle
way and and i love you for it i think
your audience is so fortunate to have an
interviewer like you and have a have a
host like you because
you're really putting in the work so i
want to thank you from the bottom of my
heart as a friend also know as an
admirer and a fan
and uh yeah hopefully we've done your
community justice today so thank you
dude i'm sure that we have he talks
about values in the book and all of that
is because i have a value uh that aligns
with all that stuff so guys
trust me when i say an extraordinary
life can be yours he gives you a
blueprint a road map if you will for
exactly what to do to bring the ashram
to you so
get it read it put it to you so it will
change you and speaking of things it
will change you if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
look at yourself in 10 15 20 years time
and ask yourself the question
is that where i want to be
and if the answer is no
then you need to find a new part
to just get to understand yourself you
don't know what you need in your life
until you figure out who you are
you